---
date : 2025-01-19
weight: 605
tags: ['2025-01']
categories: ['BI']
bookHidden: true
title: "BI"
---

# NetMHCpan

## 목록

논문 | NetMHCpan 4.0: Improved peptide-MHC class I interaction predictions integrating eluted ligand and peptide binding affinity data [>>]


---

## NetMHCpan 4.0: Improved peptide-MHC class I interaction predictions integrating eluted ligand and peptide binding affinity data

## Abstract

Cytotoxic T cells are of central importance in the immune system’s response to disease. They recognize defective cells by binding to peptides presented on the cell surface by MHC (major histocompatibility complex) class I molecules. Peptide binding to MHC molecules is the single most selective step in the antigen presentation pathway. On the quest for T cell epitopes, the prediction of peptide binding to MHC molecules has therefore attracted large attention. In the past, predictors of peptide-MHC interaction have in most cases been trained on binding affinity data. Recently an increasing amount of MHC presented peptides identified by mass spectrometry has been published containing information about peptide processing steps in the presentation pathway and the length distribution of naturally presented peptides. Here, we present NetMHCpan-4.0, a method trained on both binding affinity and eluted ligand data leveraging the information from both data types. Large-scale benchmarking of the method demonstrates an increased predictive performance compared to state-of-the-art when it comes to identification of naturally processed ligands, cancer neoantigens, and T cell epitopes.

## Introduction

Cytotoxic T cells play a central role in the immune regulation of pathogenesis and malignancy. They perform the task of scrutinizing the surface of cells for the non-self peptides presented in complex with MHC (major histocompatibility complex) molecules. In cases such peptides are recognized, an immune response can be initiated potentially leading to killing of the infected (mal-functioning) cell. The most selective step in the pathway leading to this peptide presentation is the binding to MHC.

Over the last decades, large efforts have been dedicated to the development of computational methods capable of accurately predicting this event. The accuracy of these methods has improved substantially over the last years, and most recent benchmark results demonstrate that more than 90% of naturally presented MHC ligands are identified at an impressive specificity of 98% ([1](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R1)). This gain in performance is achieved partly by the extended experimental binding data sets made available in the IEDB ([2](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R2)), and partly by the development of novel machine-learning algorithms capable of capturing the information in the experimental binding data in a more effective manner. One such novel method is NNAlign-2.0, allowing the integration of peptides of variable length into the machine-learning framework ([3](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R3)). This novel training approach allows both the incorporation of a larger set of training data, but also and maybe more importantly enables the method to directly learn the length preference presented peptides for each MHC molecule from the experimental binding data ([4](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R4)). Even though most presented MHC class I ligands are of length 9 amino acids, the ability to incorporate length preferences directly into the model is critical as experimental data demonstrate that the length profiles of presented ligands can vary substantially between MHC molecules; prominent examples are the mouse H-2-Kb, with a preference for eight amino acids-long peptides ([5](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R5)) and HLA-A*01:01, where close to one third of MHC presented peptides have a length longer than nine amino acids ([6](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R6)).

Some of the most well documented and applied of methods for predicting peptide binding to MHC class I include NetMHC ([4](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R4), [7](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R7)), and NetMHCpan ([1](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R1), [8](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R8)). These tools have over the last years gained increasing interest due to the recent focus on neoantigen identification within the field of personalized immunotherapy ([9](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R9), [10](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R10)). However, as underlined in several studies including the recent Nature Biotechnology Editorial ([11](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R11)), “neoantigen discovery and validation remains a daunting problem”, mostly due to the relative high false positive rate of predicted epitopes.

One potential cause for this relatively high rate of false positive epitope predictions is the fact that most methods are trained on binding affinity data, and as a consequence only model the single event of peptide-MHC binding. As stated above this binding to MHC is the most selective step in peptide antigen presentation. However, other factors including antigen processing ([12](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R12)) and the stability of the peptide:MHC complex ([13](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R13)) could influence the likelihood of a given peptide to be presented as an MHC ligand. Similarly, the length distribution of peptides available for binding to MHC molecules is impacted by other steps in the processing and presentation pathway, such as TAP transport and ERAP trimming, which are not reflected in binding data in itself ([6](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R6)). Advances in mass spectrometry (MS) have allowed the field of MS peptidomics to move forward. In this context, recent studies ([14](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R14), [15](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R15), [16](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R16)) have suggested that training prediction methods on such data rather than binding affinity data could improve the ability to accurately identify MHC ligands. As such, MS peptidome data would contain the comprehensive signal of antigen processing and presentation rather than just MHC binding affinity. Moreover, MS peptidome data generated by immunopeptidomic studies would contain precise information about the allele-specific peptide length profile preferences not available in the MHC binding affinity data sets.

Identification of MHC bound peptides by mass spectrometry thus holds great promise for the generation of large scale data sets characterizing the peptidome specific for individual MHC molecules ([15](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R15), [17](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R17)), and potentially also for the identification of T cell epitopes ([18](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R18)). It is however clear that, within the foreseeable future, the number of MHC molecules characterized by such MS studies will remain limited. In this context, large efforts have over the last decades been dedicated to experimentally characterize the peptide binding space of MHC molecules using semi high-throughput MHC-peptide binding affinity assays ([19](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R19), [20](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R20)), enabling binding specificity characterization of a large set of MHC molecules from different species.

The IEDB contains a comprehensive set of MHC binding and ligand data available in the public domain. While this data set contains binding affinity data characterizing more than 150 different MHC class I molecules (from human, non-human primates, mouse, and life-stock), at the onset of this study only 55 MHC class I molecules were characterized by MS peptidome data. This imbalance made us suggest a novel machine learning approach integrating information from both types of data (binding affinity and MS ligands) into a combined framework benefitting from information from the two worlds. The proposed framework is “pan-specific” as it can leverage information across MHC molecules, data types, and peptide lengths into one single model. We hence expect this approach to achieve superior predictive performance compared to models trained on the two data types individually, and also achieve an improved performance when it comes to predicting length profile preferences of different MHC molecules.

While recent works have demonstrated the improved ability to identify MHC ligands using methods trained on MS peptidome data ([14](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R14), [15](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R15)), limited data is available on their impact for the identification of T cell epitopes. In this work, we focus on demonstrating the improved prediction performance not only on large sets of MS peptidome data but also on T cell epitope data independent from the data used to train the new predictor.

## Materials and Methods

### Data sets

Data on all class I MHC ligand elution assays available in IEDB database ([www.iedb.org](http://www.iedb.org/)) were collected including the ligand sequence, details of the source protein, position of the ligand in the source protein and the restricting allele of the ligand. There were 160,527 distinct assays in total and the length of the ligands ranged from 4–37. All lengths with a count of ligands at least 0.5% of total ligands were selected for further analysis which included lengths 8–15 and comprised of 99% of the assay entries.

The restricting MHC molecule of the ligands were analyzed and entries with alleles listed unambiguously were selected. For example, some entries where the HLA alleles are listed as just the gene name and alleles from chicken, horse, cow and mouse for which we did not have binding prediction algorithms were excluded. Representative alleles were assigned for entries where only supertypes were listed (e.g. HLA-A*26:01 for HLA-A26). Thus there were 127 class I molecules from human and mouse in the selected data set. Redundant entries with same ligand sequence and MHC molecule were removed and MHC molecules with at least 50 ligand entries were selected. This included 55 class I molecules and the number of available ligands per molecule varied widely from 50 to 9500.

We hypothesized that some of the ligands could be artefacts of the elution assays and therefore their source proteins could be false positive as antigens. A protocol was designed to identify such false positive antigens and exclude them from the final data selected. The protocol identified proteins that had significantly lesser number of predicted binders among ligands than expected of random peptides using binomial probability distribution. Five sets of random peptides were generated from the ligand sequences by shuffling the amino acid residues within the ligands. Binding affinity was then predicted for the original ligands and random peptide sets for their corresponding alleles. The median of the predicted percentile ranks of the five random sets was estimated and assigned as the binding affinity of the random peptides. Based on a predicted binding affinity cut-off of percentile rank 1.0, the number of predicted binders among the original ligands and the random peptide sets were estimated. Five proteins were thus identified as false positives and ligand entries from these proteins were excluded from the data set.

The final data set had 85,217 entries in total with ligand length ranging from 8 to 15. The ligands originated from 14,797 source antigens and were restricted by 55 unique HLA molecules.

Random artificial negatives were generated for each MHC molecule covered by eluted ligand data by sampling randomly 10*N peptides of each length 8–15 amino acids from the antigen source protein sequences, where N is the number of 9mer ligands for the given MHC molecule.

### Neural network training

The NNAlign training approach with insertions and deletions ([3](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R3)) was extended by adding a second output neuron as shown in [figure 1](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#F1). This was done to allow combined training on binding affinity and MS eluted ligand data. Binding affinity values are measured as IC50 values in nM (aff) and can be rescaled to the interval [0,1] by applying 1-log(aff)/log(50,000), representing continuous target values ([21](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5679736/#R21)). For eluted ligands the strength of the interaction between peptide and MHC molecules is unknown, therefore a target value of 1 is assigned to binders and 0 to artificial negative peptides (see above).
