---
author: "kinda"
date: 2024-08-19
title: "[Paper] Immune response stability differential splicing of HLA"
categories: ["Works"]
tags: ["vaccine-response"]
---

# [Paper] Immune response stability to the SARS‐CoV‐2 mRNA vaccine booster is influenced by differential splicing of HLA genes

## Abstract

Many molecular mechanisms that lead to the host antibody response to COVID‐19 vaccines remain largely unknown. In this study, we used serum antibody detection combined with whole blood RNA‐ based transcriptome analysis to investigate variability in vaccine response in healthy recipients of  a booster (third) dose schedule of the mRNA BNT162b2 vaccine against COVID‐19. The cohort was divided into two groups: (1) low‐stable individuals, with antibody concentration anti‐SARS‐CoV IgG S1 below 0.4 percentile at 180 days after boosting vaccination; and (2) high‐stable individuals, with antibody values greater than 0.6 percentile of the range in the same period (median 9525 [185–80,000] AU/mL). Differential gene expression, expressed single nucleotide variants and insertions/deletions, differential splicing events, and allelic imbalance were explored to broaden our understanding of the immune response sustenance. Our analysis revealed a differential expression of genes with immunological functions in individuals with low antibody titers, compared to those with higher antibody titers, underscoring the fundamental importance of the innate immune response for boosting immunity. Our findings also provide new insights into the determinants of the immune response variability to the SARS‐CoV‐2 mRNA vaccine booster, highlighting the significance of differential splicing regulatory mechanisms, mainly concerning HLA alleles, in delineating vaccine immunogenicity.

Keywords SARS-CoV-2, Vaccine response, Whole blood transcriptome, Immune response variability, Admixed population, Human leukocyte antigen

> **dataset**
> - mRNA BNT162b2 백신의 부스터 접종을 받은 healthy recipients
> - 백신 접종 후 생성된 항체(serum antibody detection) 데이터
> - 유전자 발현(whole blood RNA‐based transcriptome analysis) 데이터
> - 백신에 대한 면역 반응 비교

> **group**
> - Low‐stable individuals: 부스터 접종 후 180일이 지난 시점에서 항-SARS-CoV IgG S1 항체 농도가 0.4 백분위수(percentile) 이하인 사람들로, 항체 농도가 낮고 안정적인 그룹.
> - High‐stable individuals: 동일한 시점에서 항체 농도가 0.6 백분위수 이상인 사람들로, 항체 농도가 높고 안정적인 그룹.

> **result summary**
> - Differential gene expression: 낮은 항체 농도를 가진 사람들과 높은 항체 농도를 가진 사람들 간에 선천성 면역 기능을 가진 유전자들의 발현이 다름. 
> - SNV
> - Differential splicing events: HLA 대립유전자와 관련된 차별적 스플라이싱 조절 메커니즘이 백신 면역원성(면역 반응을 유도하는 능력)을 구분하는 데 중요한 역할을 함.
> - Allelic imbalance

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coro- navirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), posed an unprecedented burden upon global healthcare systems with concurrently substantial economic disruptions, as evidenced by prolonged lockdown measures1. COVID-19 vaccines were developed, tested, and approved in record time, substantially reducing the number of cases, hospitalizations, and deaths worldwide2. This success, particularly in regions with high vaccination coverage, thereby ratifies that efficacious vaccination approaches harbor the potential to deal with emerging viruses.

SARS-CoV-2 vaccines encompass a broad spectrum of approaches, including inactivated viral particles, live attenuated vaccines, viral vectors encoding the viral spike protein, mRNA constructs, and adjuvanted spike protein subunits3. Nonetheless, despite the administration of more than six billion doses of COVID-19 vaccines, the high effectiveness of the COVID-19 vaccines reaching up to 95%4, and the fact that the latest viral variants exhibit reduced lethality among immunized individuals, SARS-CoV-2 transmission persisted even at a low speed.

Besides, many COVID-19 cases occur in vaccinated individuals5. Escape from the immune response or a sub- optimal immune response can partially contribute to virus spread, favoring new variants’ emergence. However, a comprehensive understanding of the factors underlying differentiated host immune responses to COVID-19 vaccines, even among immunocompetent individuals, is still in progress.

Consistent variations in vaccine immunogenicity are a recurring phenomenon for different viruses. One piv- otal aspect requiring thorough characterization concerns host differences in sustaining immunogenicity elicited by vaccines over time and the identification of genetic drivers influencing the immune response to COVID-19 vaccines has been the focus of several studies. Indeed, investigations into the spectral individual variation in functional immune response have revealed a notable genetic connection with vaccination response. Twin studies have provided insights by highlighting that monozygotic twins exhibit lesser variability than dizygotic twins in their vaccine-induced responses under controlled environmental conditions6. Furthermore, the host’s genetic background, primarily characterized by single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in genes encoding human leukocyte antigen (HLA) classes I and II, cytokines, cytokine receptors, and genes involved in innate immune response (e.g., Toll-like receptors), can partly elucidate the interindividual variability in the immune response to vaccines, such as measles and rubella7–12, hepatitis B7,13–15, influenza16, smallpox17, or Bacillus anthracis18. Besides, differ- ent ethnic groups living in the same geographical location exhibit diverse immune responses to vaccination or antibodies’ decline, suggesting a genetic modulatory influence in the dynamics of vaccine-induced responses19.

Additional factors influencing immune response variability include intrinsic host issues (e.g. age, gender, comorbidities, body mass index, micronutrients, microbiota, preexisting immunity) and extrinsic elements (e.g. smoking, alcohol consumption, exercise, psychological stress, and toxins exposure)19. Furthermore, compelling evidence indicates the existence of ethnic diversity in vaccine-induced antibody levels20. Thus, efforts directed towards the comprehensive understanding of the wide-ranging spectrum of immune responses observed among healthy individuals and the intricate mechanisms underlying this variability may help to develop more effec- tive immunogenic vaccines and overwhelm vaccine failures. Indeed, high-throughput methodologies, such as RNA-based transcriptome analyses, can be gold standard tools to explore this landscape, since they reflect both intrinsic and extrinsic factors affecting humoral, cellular, innate, cytokine, and adaptive immune responses21. Transcriptomic analysis in blood, an accessible tissue reflective of immune system dynamics22, can be employed to discern potential signatures of vaccine-induced responses or to characterize their minor expression or complete absence in less responsive individuals.

On a global scale, Brazil emerged as a prominent hub for SARS-CoV-2 spread during pandemics, marked by elevated counts of both cases and deaths23 (https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html). Conversely, it boasts a robust immunization program, resulting in significant adherence to SARS-CoV-2 vaccination compared to many other countries. Among the COVID-19 vaccines distributed in Brazil, CoronaVac (Sinovac), a whole inactivated virus vaccine, received regulatory approval from the Brazilian Health Regulatory Agency (ANVISA) in January 2021 and then spread as one of the most globally employed vaccines. The Covishield vaccine was the second vaccine to be administered in the country. It was developed by the University of Oxford in partnership with the pharmaceutical company AstraZeneca, using the modified chimpanzee adenovirus ChAdOx1 as a vector. Subsequently, in response to the emergence of several Variants of Concern (VOCs), notably the Delta (B.1.617.2) and Omicron variants, the Brazilian government introduced the administration of a booster dose of the mRNA BNT162b2 vaccine (BioNTech/Pfizer) to those who had completed the primary vaccination schedule at least six months earlier, aiming to reinforce immune protection against COVID-1924,25.

SARS-CoV-2 BNT162b2 vaccine (Pfizer-Biontech) is an mRNA vaccine engineered with lipid nanoparticles and nucleoside modifications, designed to encode a full-length, prefusion-stabilized SARS-CoV-2 spike protein anchored within the viral membrane. It has demonstrated safety and efficacy in preventing COVID-1926. Recently, an observational retrospective investigation was conducted to assess the antibody response at intervals of 120 and 180 days after the BNT162b2 vaccine in 1.115 subjects, evidencing that the second dose of this vaccine allows a satisfactory antibody response27. Furthermore, booster vaccination enables higher protection against SARS- CoV-2 variants than is achieved with a primary series of vaccination, although antibody titers naturally decrease over time, requiring additional boosting28,29. However, studies investigating the impact of genetic regulation of the immune response to the BNT162b2 vaccine and the antibodies’ stability have been few and ethnically restricted.

To better understand SARS-CoV-2 vaccine-induced immunogenicity and why some individuals sustain anti- body titers after receiving the booster dose better than others, we analyzed the antibody response elicited by the BNT162b2 vaccine. We also carried out bulk RNA-based transcriptome analysis from whole blood 180 days after vaccination boosting. Additionally, our systematic bioinformatic analysis showed a potential role for innate immune regulatory mechanisms in maintaining humoral response after vaccination boosting. Besides, we found high correlations between differential alternative splicing events and vaccine response, mainly concerning HLA genes. These genes hold the potential to serve as predictors of vaccine response, highlighting the valuable role of molecular profiling in improving the accuracy of vaccine response prediction.
