---
date : 2025-08-03
tags: ['2025-08']
categories: ['bioinformatics']
bookHidden: true
title: "EBV DHT 연구:  contribution 정리"
---

# EBV DHT 연구: contribution 정리

#2025-08-03

---

### 1. Link

Paper1 - [Dihydrotestosterone Enhances MICA-Mediated Immune Responses to Epstein–Barr Virus-Associated Gastric Carcinoma](https://www.mdpi.com/2072-6694/16/18/3219)

Paper2 - [Dihydrotestosterone-androgen receptor signaling suppresses EBV-positive gastric cancer through DNA demethylation-mediated viral reactivation](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10120-025-01626-6)

```
#Paper1
  └── 3. ChIP-Seq Assay

#Paper2
  └── 2. RNA-seq analysis
  └── 14. Bioinformatics analysis of methylome
```

###

### 2. Contributions

<mark>1. ChIP-Seq Assay</mark>

Among the above p65 ChIP samples, the sample treated with 100 nM DHT for 30 min showed the strong p65 enrichment on the SNU719 genome. Therefore, this 30 min-treated p65 ChIP sample was analyzed by a next-generation sequencing (NGS) assay to identify the genome-wide locus where the p65 protein is enriched. As a control, IgG ChIP samples were also analyzed by NGS assay to identify non-selective enrichment. The validated ChIP samples were further isolated by agarose gel purification, ligated to primers, and subjected to Illumina-based sequencing using the manufacturer’s protocol (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) for ChIP-seq analysis. ChIP-seq reads were mapped to the EBV wild-type reference genome (NC 007605) using Bowtie software (version 2.3.4.1). The MAC2 tool was used for peak calling [12].

* ChIP-seq alignment: Bowtie
* Peak calling: MAC2
* Visualization: IGV

###

<mark>2. RNA-seq analysis</mark>

RNA-seq analysis was performed on SNU719 cells treated with 100 nM DHT for 24 h, with EtOH-treated cells as control. Total RNA was extracted using TRIzol® reagent (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. RNA concentration was calculated using Quant-IT RiboGreen (#R11490, Invitrogen). RNA integrity was assessed using TapeStation RNA ScreenTape (#5067-5576, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA), with only samples having RIN values > 7.0 used for library construction. Libraries were prepared with 0.5 μg total RNA using Illumina TruSeq Stranded Total RNA Library Prep Gold Kit (#20020599, Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). Libraries were quantified using KAPA Library Quantification Kits (#KK4854, KAPA Biosystems, Bath, UK) and qualified using TapeStation D1000 ScreenTape (#5067-5582, Agilent Technologies). Paired-end (2 × 100 bp) sequencing was performed on Illumina NovaSeq by Macrogen Incorporated (Seoul, Korea). Sequencing reads were processed using Trimmomatic v0.38 to remove adapter sequences and trim low-quality bases. Cleaned reads were aligned to the Homo sapiens genome (GRCh38) using HISAT v2.1.0. Aligned data were sorted and indexed using SAMtools v1.9 [27, 28]. Transcripts were assembled and quantified using StringTie v2.1.3b. Differential gene expression analysis was performed using edgeR v3.40.2 with TMM normalization. Significance was assessed using edgeR exactTest, with p-values adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg algorithm. Significant genes were filtered by |fold change|≥ 2 and raw p-value < 0.05. Gene enrichment and functional annotation analyses were performed using gProfiler against GO and KEGG databases. All data analyses and visualizations were performed using R 4.2.2.

* Read processing: Trimmomatic
* Sequence alignment: HISAT, SAMtools
* DE analysis: edgeR
* Gene enrichment analysis: gProfiler

###

<mark>3. Bioinformatics analysis of methylome</mark>

WGBS samples (DHT0, DHT100, and DHT5000) were aligned to the hg38 human reference genome using Bismark v0.22.3 with the bismark_genome_preparation function. Bowtie2 v2.3.4.1 was used for read alignment. Duplicate reads were removed using deduplicate_bismark, and methylation counts were extracted using bismark_methylation_extractor with a minimum read coverage threshold of 5. This identified 313,958, 227,225, and 393,751 methylated and non-methylated sites for DHT0, DHT100, and DHT5000 samples, respectively. Genome-wide methylation profiles were filtered to gene promoter regions (2 kb upstream of TSS) using Bedtools v2.27.1, identifying 34,061, 13,170, and 35,802 methylated sites within promoter regions in DHT0, DHT100, and DHT5000 samples, respectively. Methylated read counts were summed per promoter region, resulting in 4167, 3098, and 5091 unique promoter regions across the three samples. The union set comprised 8449 promoter regions for downstream analysis. Methylation counts were log2-transformed and quantile normalized to remove sample bias.

* WGBS alignment: Bismark, Bowtie2
* Promoter filtering: Bedtools
* DM analysis: methylKit

#